a and kpfb in berkeley
and kfcf in fresno for the time now is
about 30 seconds after 12 o'clock
it's time now to have a listen to
the fbi takes aim
a devastating account of the fbi's
involvement in the trials resulting from
wounded me
[Music]
here today is uh jack schwartz he's been
with the american indian movement
as a lawyer for the past three years and
he's worked with the
american indian movement for the past
five years the first two years
organizing
support groups and today he's here with
us and he's going to
talk about the fbi's
continuing interest in the american
indian movement
and let's just go from there
what can you bring us up on some of the
history of
what the fbi has been doing in regard to
the american indian movement
yeah uh thank you for having me here and
giving me the opportunity to explain
what's been going on around the country
i imagine that people here
have an idea of what the american indian
movement is
and also an idea of what the fbi is or
has been doing
more and more of the truth about the fbi
exposing it as the largest organized
criminal organization
in the world has been coming out in the
newspapers even here
and it has to be put into a perspective
of what happens when you have two forces
the fbi and the american indian movement
coming at each other
at totally opposite purposes
the last trial i did was in los angeles
county
in california which was the paul
skyhorse
richard mohawk trial people may have
heard about it out here i'm not sure
if we got that much publicity usually
when we win
cases we don't get much press it's only
our losses that get
slapped across the newspapers the sky
horse mohawk trial was
the longest criminal trial in southern
california history
the trial itself lasted for 14 months it
was a first degree murder
with special circumstances was the
specific charge that means
that the victim was tortured to death
it's a death penalty case in california
under the
the old uh punishment laws
the pre-trial hearings and motions
lasted for two and a half years
and during the entire period the case
lasted almost four years in its entirety
sky horse and mohawk were in prison most
of the time in solitary confinement
under conditions which even amnesty
international
eventually adopted them not as convicted
people because they were not convicted
and in fact we did win that case
but because of their the conditions of
their incarceration
were so horrible the
sky horse mohawk case was a state trial
was not
done by a u.s attorney and therefore on
the face of it the fbi had nothing to do
with the case at all
it was tried by the ventura county
district attorney which is the county
just north of los angeles county
the district attorney's case which took
about nine
months and about 52 witnesses was
basically that
sky horse and mohawk and three other
people
who are living in a rural area of los
angeles county
killed a white man a white cab driver in
october of 1974.
the cab driver's name was george aired
and he was beaten
stabbed a number of times and and
viciously murdered the
government the government forces that
came into the
crime scene the sheriff's departments
the police departments and
and what have you within six or eight
hours of the murder
found three people there uh these three
people's name
uh holly brassard marvin redshirt
and marcy eagle staff these three
individuals were
arrested charged with murder as they
stood over the dead man
they were covered with blood they had
knives they had the murder weapons in
their possession they had the
victim's personal effects in their
pockets his
his cards his id his trip sheet his
car keys and an interesting thing
happened
there were at least six fbi agents on
the scene
of the crime in a non-federal case on
non-federal land therefore they had no
legal jurisdiction for being there
now we tie that in with the fact that
within 10 days of the murder the three
people caught at the scene of the crime
are given immunity are set free
and sky horse and mohawk are arrested in
phoenix arizona
charged with first-degree murder
extradited back to los angeles and
thrown in jail
the three actual murderers were given
immunity in return for their testimony
against skyhorse and mohawk
now that might be interpreted as just
bad
judgment by a district attorney by a
prosecutorial staff
to be fair to his side of the case
skyhorse and mohawk were
at the area of the murder when it
occurred
there were six people there that that
evening
but as the facts come out it was obvious
that skyhorse and mohawk had absolutely
nothing to do with killing
the cab driver in fact did not know that
person was being killed at all
well during the years of the pretrial
motions we set about trying to figure
out why
two people that there was no evidence
against no fingerprints
no hair samples no skin samples no blood
samples
and only one eyewitness who was red
shirt the man who was found standing
over the dead man
and covered with blood why the state
would go to the trouble spending 1.8
million dollars
on a case which as far as the jury told
us after the case they could not win
where there was never any doubt in the
jury's mind that skyhorse and mohoka
being framed
for some reason my particular task in
that trial was to try to explain
why the inconsistencies of evidence
occurred and our analysis was because
the fbi was involved
in manipulating the prosecutor
in order to get the only two activists
involved in any way with the scene of
the crime
to be punished for the crime which they
did not commit
in my work on that particular case we
discovered that both sky horse and
mohawk had
fbi files going back at least seven or
eight years covering everything they've
done in their lives
where they've given the speeches what
articles they'd written who they lived
with what they did
it followed mohawk back to his childhood
in new york state
uh it went back to sky horse's
organizing of the illinois aim chapter
in 1973.
skyhorse's participation in the
insurrection wounded knee
in 73. and in fact
when you analyze fbi documents which is
something that i've been doing for a
number of years
by their numbers and by the the code
used on the documents you could tell
whether or not
the work being done against the
so-called criminal individual is
actually legal criminal investigation
or is on the other hand political and
therefore not within the
the legal jurisdiction of the
intelligence community
the fbi is split into two sections in
terms of their investigations one is
one part is the general investigations
division and the other one is the
domestic intelligence division
most of domestic intelligence is not
supposed to be going on
it has to do with uh just political
activities
something that the fbi has been doing
since the 20s since the 30s since the
palmer raids since they were used
against unions
later used against populist farm groups
against
anybody that the federal government
thought was
any kind of threat
now within the domestic intelligence
division there's an internal security
branch section two
and within that there is a section 157
which is indian spanish surnamed and
black radicals and underneath that on
their schematic diagram is a section 170
which are the informants and
provocateurs used in section 157
we found that all of sky horse and
mohawk's files were listed as 157's
as opposed to the sections of the fbi
which take care of criminal work
and that gave us our first evidence that
this was not a criminal case but in fact
was
a political prosecution
now one has to ask why does the fbi go
to this kind of trouble
the murder occurred in october of 1974
during the time in which about 350 aim
people and supporters were being tried
throughout the midwest for wounded knee
in fact just one month before the murder
of george aired the means banks case was
thrown out
in saint paul all 20 felony charges were
thrown out of court by a judge who had
been the chairman of the americanism
committee
of the south dakota american legion
judge fred nicol
he threw out all 20 federal leading
charges because of the fbi's
falsification of evidence their
subording perjury on the witness stand
of the manipulation of witnesses
just generally doing all the things that
for instance jimmy carter complains that
the russians do in their court system
the fbi took a very bad beating in the
press their image was very badly
tarnished
after the means banks trial and also
after the fact that
of 600 people arrested wounded knee less
than seven were ever convicted of
anything
and not a single person ever spent any
time in prison
for participating in wounded knee for
being convicted of anything during
wounded knee
most of the money which was coming to
the defense lawyers and the defense
teams in the midwest to fight the
wounded knee cases
did not come from the midwest but came
from the liberal and affluent
populations of the northeast
and of the west coast one of the places
we got a great deal of money from was
the los
angeles area la is the largest urban
indian community in the country and also
has a very wealthy liberal
community as soon as skyhorse and mohawk
were charged with
a murder and a torture and the l.a times
and the other press
played it up as an indian ritual killing
of a white man that he
they said he was scalped castrated hung
none of which occurred we traced all
these false stories to the sheriff's
department in ventura county
but they accomplished what they set out
to do as soon as skyhorse and mohawk
were charged and the press was
manipulated our funds from the los
angeles area died cut about 99
at the time i was working in rapid city
south dakota
and i in fact was doing the financial
books and
our our resources dried up
we're talking about the government
having unlimited resources to try indian
people at that time in six different
places
throughout the midwest at the same time
and
um we were trying to keep up with that
and that basically in my mind was the
goal of the prosecution of sky horse and
mohawk
as i said after three and a half years
of being in court and
four years of skyhorse and mohawk being
in prison
we eventually won the jury
took one vote and they were unanimous on
the first balloting
and in fact i've interviewed some of the
jurors from that case and they all said
that not only was there no evidence
against the defendants but
it did bother them that through the
trial through the evidence they were
able to
learn that the fbi was somewhat involved
although the judge
and the u.s attorney and the fbi agents
who were subpoenaed to that case
all refused to tell what they were doing
now we find this is a part of a
continual pattern of what the fbi has
been doing to the american indian
movement throughout the country
whether it's in the the northwest where
the struggle is around the fishing
rights
in in the waterways or in the new york
area or the main
where the struggle is around timber and
land control
or in the navajo area where the struggle
is against the uh
the polluting energy resource uh
corporations coming in and taking indian
land where the american indian movement
is an organization of but
of both young and old indian people
who want indian people to have control
of indian land
they want to go back to all the valid
treaties
all 380 some odd treaties signed between
the united states and indian tribes
which under international law and under
the u.s constitution
are still valid treaties the united
states has broken every single one of
them
and continues to this day to break all
of them
aim is trying to regain the control of
the land so that indian people can
keep the the resources that's on their
land we have to realize that today
with the so-called energy crisis most of
the usable
shale oil coal uranium a great deal of
the fishing areas the timber areas
of the united states are on indian
reservations are on land which are
legally
and morally indian controlled land
the job of the fbi as it has been in the
past against other organizations
and other movements is to make it easy
for the multinational corporations who
in effect
through their financial contributions
control the republican and democratic
parties
to be able at the at the least cost to
themselves
plunder the resources on indian land
and what's stopping the fbi from
allowing canada
cop or peabody coal and these
corporations from coming into indian
land is the american indian movement
and their belief that land is sacred
that there's a responsibility to
leave the earth in a better condition
than it was when a person comes into the
world
that the earth should be treated as
sacred that there's a responsibility to
have the earth
for future generations whereas
multinational corporations have the
ethic of
profit of getting as much money out of
the resources as possible regardless of
how
badly damaged the land is after they're
finished with their work
part of the fbi's campaigns against aim
include the area that i'm involved in
because i'm an attorney which is the
politically motivated prosecutions
of activist indians there hasn't been
that much news in the last few months
things are extremely quiet
a lot of the famous cases involving
indian people are now an appeal
but just as as examples in cases in
different parts of the country i'll
mention a few cases a few activists who
are caught up in the judicial system
for instance in washington state there
is a woman named yvonne juan rao
who six years ago shot a drunk man who
is about to sexually molest
her infant child a man who had been
convicted of a number of
sexual incidents against children in
that part of the state
she tried to stop him she at the time
she's yvonne is about five feet tall
she's a very small woman at the time had
a broken leg with a cast up to her hip
and this man about 230 pounds drunk
comes into her house and attacks her and
her children she killed the men
in self-defense state of washington
tried her and found her guilty of murder
she had the conviction overturned and at
this point the supreme court of the
state of washington is deciding whether
or not to
retry her for defending her children one
of the reasons that
the state has been going after her for
six years is because of her active
participation
in the indian movement in the state of
washington
my belief is that if a white woman had
done the same thing to an intruder who
was about to molest her children
that woman would have been congratulated
for doing what any other
person would have done which is protect
their family
another case up in south dakota where i
i used to practice there's a man named
dick marshall who was an aim organizer
in pine ridge
dick is now serving life sentence at
hard labor for murder
he and russell means were charged with
killing a man in a bar room brawl
a man who on his deathbed told the
police that
marshall and means did not do it
and he later died marshall and means
were tried separately russell was
acquitted and and dick marshall was not
we find that the basic information for
the prosecution in that case came from a
woman by the name of myrtle poor bear
who has since recanted her testimony
has said in affidavits and in court and
in fact is now saying in the appeal of
dick marshall's case
that the fbi threatened to kill her as
they had another woman anime aquash
they threatened her they tried to pay
her they tried to bribe her they tried
to threaten her family in order to get
her to be
a snitch an informant and they were in
fact successful in her case
in dick marshall's case
that that trial that conviction is also
on appeal
now moving up is another example to new
york state people remember the uprising
in attica
in the early 70s i believe it was 1972.
the only person
presently imprisoned in new york state
for anything having to do with the
attica riot
even though hundreds of troopers state
troopers and militiamen were attacked by
the mckay commission as being extremely
violent and vicious and sadistic in
their takeover of the prison
and in fact despite the number of
convictions of inmates
for alleged crimes only one person
john hill is serving any time in new
york state for attica
he is a mohawk indian he's the only
person in prison
for any participation in attica
and i could go on and on all over the
country about
individual cases of aim people indian
activists being framed
caught up in in this kind of system
people remember back in i guess it was
two summers ago
there was a case called butler robidu
case in cedar rapids iowa i was one of
the attorneys on that case where
four aim activists were charged with
killing two fbi agents
agents calder and williams during a
shootout at pine ridge reservation
in 1975 june 2675
that trial again lasted a very long time
the government spent millions of dollars
had about 270 full-time fbi agents and
seven u.s attorneys working
on the prosecution they indicted four
aimed people
dino butler bob robidoux jimmy eagle and
leonard peltier
again these aim activists are taken off
the reservation are taken out of their
homes
and prevented from continuing their
political work
by being brought into court and having
to sit through
court processes for a number of years
even if they're not convicted the
government
obtains its goal of putting people out
of commission
and what happened to those four people
the button the robinhood case two of the
men were trying to see the rapids we got
a full
acquittal in an all-white iowa jury
on the basis of our proof that the fbi
for the first time we were able to prove
on paper by using the fbi's own
documents that they had a campaign
to neutralize and destroy the american
indian movement
and as part of that campaign was a heavy
uh program of provocateurs
of trying to incite violence on
reservations
most of the time that doesn't make news
because the only people who die because
of the provocation are indian people
in this instance when the fbi agents
attacked
this particular camp on the reservation
two of the agents
and one indian man were killed and again
the press
came out and said the agents begged for
their lives and they were shot with
machine guns and scalped and castrated
and they begged and they said some of
their best friends are indians and what
have you
at trial we proved that all this press
was false
it was put out by the fbi's propaganda
minister a man named tom
cole whose job is only to manipulate and
control
the press and he does a very good job of
it
because of the inflammatory press we had
the trial moved from south dakota to
iowa
the iowa jury after a long trial
understood what it meant to be attacked
on the reservation by fbi agents
and they understood and accepted our
defense
that these indian people were firing
back in self-defense protecting
their community and their children from
an attack
and much to our surprise a group of 12
middle-aged middle-class
white iowa citizens were able to
accept the fact that fbi agents are not
the people you see
in the ephraim zimbabwes junior show
but are in fact very close to being
america's gestapo
in that case they did a typical
prosecution um
i mentioned before anime a quash who was
one of our defense witnesses
she was killed at the either by or at
the behest of the fbi
in february of 1975.
excuse me 76.
it's an interesting case in that the fbi
found her body
cut off her hands and fingers sent them
to washington dc buried her under a
false name at pine ridge reservation
had a doctor from nebraska list
on the autopsy sheet that anna may had
died of
exposure we brought the body up
because we didn't believe that the
weather had been very mild on the
reservation that year
we brought the body up and she had a
gaping hole behind her left ear
and we had the medical examiner for
saint paul
come in and examine the body he said
that she was shot at point-blank range
the back of her head by either a 32 or a
38.
to this day the fbi who of course we
feel was part of
the the murder of anime
um maintains that they don't know who
did it they won't comment on the case
they won't respond to freedom of
information act suits because their
excuses that the case is still under
investigation even though they have no
clues no suspects
we have a good idea and people on the
reservation believe that they know why
the fbi can't come up with anything
because
they probably know who did it and are
protecting that individual or
individuals
again like most aim trials the attorneys
were followed there were wiretaps there
were burglaries of our offices
there were infiltrators put into our law
offices
in fact at one point the fbi attacked my
office in rapid
city eight of the agents and tried to go
through our files
without any warrants unfortunately it's
a very common thing to suspend the
constitution
on uh indian land and reservations
no one ever hears about it there's no
outrage
there's no press coverage there's no
protection by by
liberals or by politicians
things that would not happen in downtown
columbia happen every day in places like
pine ridge
indian people are are hauled
through the system are interrogated at
gunpoint very often their relatives are
threatened their families are threatened
and so on to back back up a little bit
the four
indian people who were charged with
killing the two agents butler and
robindu were acquitted
jimmy eagle after spending 15 months in
prison as a 20 year old man was a
was let go without being charged because
the government after 15 months admitted
there was never any evidence
and in fact jimmy's grandmother a woman
by the name of gladys bissonnette is one
of the organizers of aim
on pine ridge reservation and my belief
is that they kept jimmy in jail
to get after her to see if she would
tell them
what they wanted to know about the
deaths of the agents of course she would
not do it
jimmy would not cooperate with him they
kept him in jail more than a year and
then released him
the government started to panic they
were losing all these cases so they
their last chance was to get a man named
leonard peltier
leonard was tried in fargo north dakota
in one of the most rigged racist
trials i've ever heard of again the only
witness against him was myrtle poor bear
who at trial the defense tried to
introduce
her as a witness to say she was told
that if she did not cooperate and lie
for the fbi that she would end up like
anime
she came forward to us and said that she
had lied against leonard
that she had told the fbi that she
watched him kill the agents when in fact
she was not even
in south dakota at the time of of the
deaths
and she said that she had been offered
by the fbi
a free one-way trip to hawaii so that we
could not find her to interview her
during the trial and so on and so forth
that that kind of story came out the
judge in north dakota refused to let us
put any evidence on
as to any frame-up of any perjury of any
manipulation of witnesses and in fact of
any recantation
of testimony by the only eyewitness
myrtle poor bear
again that case has been
appealed to the 8th circuit which sits
in st louis unfortunately
it was appealed to a panel of three
judges one of whom
lo and behold in the middle of the
appeal uh judge webster was made the new
head of the fbi
we tried to get a new panel of three
judges to rehear the appeal that was
denied so what we're now doing is
waiting for a decision
by one new judge and two judges who
deliberated on the appeal
with the new head of the fbi on a case
where a man is charged and convicted of
killing two fbi agents
and today leonard peltier is in marion
federal pen
serving two life sentences for murders
that uh
for alleged murders which he did not
commit
i can go on and on and in fact i assume
that
people who have not heard about these
things and not have to believe them
hearing them from me i would encourage
people to
get involved a little bit more and see
things we always encourage people to go
to court for instance
when we had people in los angeles coming
to the sky horse mohawk court
they could not believe what they saw and
they
they understood what we were talking
about when they came into court
saw that scarves and mohawk often came
to court bleeding from beatings
deputies they came to a courtroom that
was split in half by a bulletproof glass
shield separating the lawyers and the
defendants from the rest of the
courtroom
they saw an insane judge who has now
been thrown out of office who is no
longer a judge yelling and screaming at
the lawyers and the defendants
coddling and cooperating with the d.a
and we encourage people that if trials
of aim people
do occur in this part of the country
that they should go and and see for
themselves the kind of travesty of
justice that are that their tax
money is going to
i would suggest two things for people
who are interested in the indian
movement not only in the
section of the movement involved in
political prisoners and political
repression but in all aspects of
the indian movement one thing people can
do
is is write to an international indian
newspaper called aqua
snake notes which they can subscribe to
with any amount of money they can afford
that's about a k w e s
a s n e aqua snake notes
the address is mohawk nation
via roosevelt town new york roosevelt
town is r
double o s e v e
l t o w n the zip is one three six
eight three aqua softie notes comes out
six or eight times a year has
comprehensive coverage of the indian
movement in north
south and central america
one other thing i would mention to
people is uh
they might they might also follow up
in contacting some of the organizations
and smaller regional newsletters that
are often advertised in aqua sauced in
notes
one campaign going on in this part of
the country right now is to get russell
means out of the
south dakota state pin
russell everybody knows he's been an
indian leader for many many years he's
been tried
seven eight nine ten times some major
felonies and never convicted
he's been shot in assassination attempts
at least six seven times
no one's ever been picked up or tried
for shooting wrestle even though very
often the people are identified with
their bia
bureau of indian affairs officials
police what have you
russell is serving four years in the
state pin for what is called the sioux
falls
courthouse riot a case in which
during an aim trial in sioux falls south
dakota the judge
judge bottom went to two of the court
and observers that the
aim had brought in two clergymen from
colorado i believe one was a
an archbishop well i'm not sure what his
status in the church was but he was a
high
clergyman the judge says to these two
individuals i think you should not be in
court today there's going to be trouble
and the two clergymen refused what
happened was when the judge walked in in
the afternoon session of
court he had the tactical police squad
waiting in the
the wings the spectators refused to
stand for him as is their right not to
stand for judges they do not respect
he got extremely angry said that they
must stand or they'd be removed
the spectators refused the tax squad
came in and beat
everybody in court including spectators
they
tear gas the courtroom they beat people
with clubs and what have you
and of course a number of aimed people
were tried
uh were brought up on charges of causing
the so-called riot
most of those cases were dismissed
because they
the judge found that they could not find
people in the state of south dakota who
did not believe that there was a
possibility
that they were innocent until proven
guilty
so eight of the people were immediately
dismissed for a lack of being able to
find an unbiased jury in the state of
south dakota
when russell came up on these charges
the court went through twice as many
prospective jurors as they had
in the previous cases and refused to
dismiss even though there was the single
person out of hundreds
who did not think russell was guilty of
anything he was charged with regardless
of the evidence
in fact the very charge that russell is
now serving time for
which is some ambiguous statute called
conspiracy
to riot to obstruct justice
he's the only person ever convicted of
that charge in south dakota after he was
convicted
the statute was thrown out as being
unconstitutional is no longer a law
russell is now protesting his phony
trial
his lack of fair trial his conviction by
a racist
south dakota jury he's been on a hunger
strike now for
more than two and a half weeks he's very
weak
he's already gotten the legal papers
signed
that he is not to be force-fed if he
goes into a coma
and that he uh is now appealing to have
the case removed from state court to
federal court
so that the federal issue is a fair
trial can be fully aired the state
supreme court of south dakota is
refusing to hear any constitutional
issues on appeal
what i ask people to do if they're
interested
is not only to find out more about the
case but also when they're convinced of
the righteousness of russell's
position is that we are writing letters
to the federal judge fred nichol
in the sioux falls district court sioux
falls south dakota
asking him to release russell pending
the appeal of the federal issue so that
russell does not
die in jail from from his hunger protest
and we ask people to wire or call or
write letters to
federal district court judge fred nicol
in sioux falls south dakota
the u.s district courthouse as fast as
possible so that we can have russell out
so we can have all the legal
issues fully aired in federal court so
that some semblance of justice can be
had
without without killing russell
and that as as a quick overview are some
of the things going on with
with the indian movement with the indian
leadership in this country
we ask non-indian people who hear this
broadcast
to attempt to learn more and participate
not only for the fact that the travesty
what happens to indian people in this
country is a just a continuation without
stop of what's happened for three four
hundred years
of genocide but also the fact that if
the government and the fbi gets away
with doing what they do to the indian
movement
they're also going to do it to the rest
of us these are similar tactics they
used against the anti-war movement the
student movement the chicano movement
the black
movement the women's movement the labor
unions and they will infiltrate
they will provoke violence they will
frame people throw them in jail
and so on and so forth it doesn't begin
and doesn't end with the indian movement
and people have to realize that
there's a common enemy in the fbi that
these people are thugs
they're criminals they get away with
murder literally
and everything else that they do and if
they again get away with doing it to the
american indian movement they'll be
doing it to the rest of us
and uh people need to get involved to
stop that
thanks a lot jack i hope the message
gets heard well
thank you for having me here okay
you've been listening to jack schwartz
lawyer for the american indian movement
recorded by luke landimo at kopn in
columbia missouri
on august 27 1978
the tape is being distributed by the
program service of the national
federation of community broadcasters
you